Jeff, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Thank you for having me.
It's great to have you here.
We're going to talk maps and consuming map data
and a lot of interesting research that you've done with the data.
So you have a very cool project,
OSMNX, OpenStreetMapNetworkX,
that we're going to dive into and it really makes all of
this street and map data super accessible to users of Python, right?
Yeah.
Yeah. Excellent. I'm really looking forward to talk about that.
Before we dive into it though,
just a quick introduction. Who are you?
Yeah. So my name is Jeff Boeing.
I'm an assistant professor at the University of Southern California here in Los Angeles.
I'm in its Department of Urban Planning and Spatial Analysis.
And most of my research and teaching are around that intersection of urban planning and spatial analysis.
I did my PhD in city planning at UC Berkeley.
And my focus is on urban data science.
So using Python tools, usually open data,
to try to understand cities and housing markets and transportation networks
and how people move through space and how we can make our cities more resilient to natural disasters,
which is relevant in LA this week.
Also more equitable, nicer places to walk around and basically just better for urban living.
Okay. Well, that sounds like amazing, amazing research.
It's probably interesting to live in LA as one of the bigger, crazier locations in terms of
sort of traffic and congestion and population.
It's not New York in terms of density, but it's probably its own special beast, I imagine.
Yeah, it is.
You know, LA is an ironic place to be an urban planning professor because it can be so frustrating
for a lot of our best practices in urban planning.
But at the same time, there is no better place in the US to be studying and trying to intervene
into some of these crises that urban planning has wrought.
Yeah. Yeah. A lot of it was just, I imagine in the early days, just a free for all, right?
There was people, especially out in the West, right? The US West, people will just move out there
and there was not a whole lot going on. So what a city, just neighborhoods go that way and not quite
enough density for a lot of public transit makes it challenging. And then they become huge cities,
and that, but they're stuck with those consequences. Like, yeah, exactly.
And it's hard to, to retrofit a city once it's built out because those are people's homes and
private properties that you can't just, you know, cut from whole cloth laid out a new city plan.
Yeah. Yeah.
Are there cities out there that are basically planned from the, from scratch?
Yeah, there are places like Brasilia, the capital of Brazil was a master planned
city in the modernist era, mid-century city planning, where it's designed to look almost
like the shape of an airplane for the jet age, a modern city for the jet age.
Amazing.
Yeah.
But you know, there's a wide range of how cities come to be. Some of them are very organic,
like you think old medieval cities that just kind of formed over centuries. There are places like LA
that built out very rapidly or like in Chicago, all these straight lines following from
these 19th century ideas of rationality and orthogonal street networks. And then there are these master
planned cities where, you know, strong central leadership lets you lay it down. However, you think
is best.
Mm-hmm.
I imagine that how the cities are built has a lot to do with the people who helped construct the city or
there in the early days, how they perceived distance, right? People perceive distance in LA
by how you, how far can you go in a car in 20 minutes, but people perceived distance in Stuttgart,
how far can you walk? Maybe you can take a horse, you know, potentially, right? And that really probably
changes things.
Yeah. You know, one way we talk about that idea of the perception of distance and how the urban form
shapes up is this idea of transportation technologies in different eras. And in general, you really see
something of a death of geography. That is, if you look at a 1990s suburb of Philadelphia or of
Los Angeles, they look very similar to each other. You don't see that sort of local culture. What you see
is really building around the transportation technology and design aesthetic of the era,
rather than the local hands building the place up. And it's, you know, when cars are how you get
around, you build a city designed for cars.
Yeah. And then the cars get to be huge SUVs and they still don't fit. All right.
Let's talk. You have this really cool visualization, which I'm going to link to in the show notes,
called City Street Orientations Around the World. And it's got some pretty wild graphics. You want to
tell people about this and kind of try to describe it for folks listening?
Yeah. So what these show is the orientation of your city streets. By orientation, we mean on a compass.
Like, do they point north, south, east, west? Are they off that north, south, east, west orientation?
Or do your streets point more chaotically in all directions around the compass? Like, there isn't a
more consistent orientation. So to visualize these, I used what's basically just a histogram.
But it's a polar histogram. So where a normal histogram will count your observations across some
set of bins. For a polar histogram, we've wrapped those bins around the circle of a compass.
So that each bin represents 10 degrees around the compass. And there's 36 bins total for 360 degrees around the circle.
And then the length of each of the bars in those bins represents the frequency of streets pointing in that
direction in the city. So in a place like Chicago or Beijing on screen here, most of the streets point north, south, east, west.
And what that tells us is it's kind of grid-like. And this is common in a lot of cities around the world.
Even a lot of pre-modern cities would still orient themselves generally north, south, east, west,
just based on patterns where the sun was rising and setting.
Yeah, I'm super surprised to see, for example, Barcelona is pretty, not north, south, but it's 90 degrees.
Yeah. Yeah. So in Barcelona, you see that 19th century and early 20th century,
Aixample development. So around medieval old Barcelona,
El Defante Serrida laid out his grand city plan that is fairly grid-like around it. You can really see that here.
Yeah, absolutely. For people listening, some of them look like airplane four blade propellers,
and some look maybe like boat propellers, like really dense. But yeah, it's quite wild to get a quick look.
Do we have LA in there? We must, right?
I have LA in the big one. If you scroll down, we have American cities.
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. That's a pretty stark contrast. It's like all of them are propeller
looking other than Boston and interestingly, Charlotte. Yeah, really interesting.
Yeah, but Charlotte doesn't feel like a city like that to me, but what do I do?
Yeah. So Boston is kind of one of those pre-modern, say American cities. And its street
orientation looks like that for a couple of reasons. One, Boston is an agglomeration of multiple smaller
towns over several centuries. And each of them had grids to some extent, but they didn't all face the same
way. So they all got merged together. And then it has a lot of hills that made it harder to build, especially
in the early days. And it really predated America's obsession with grids. Charlotte is kind of the
opposite. It's late 20th century, the sort of winding streets and cul-de-sacs to make up those, you know,
arterial roads. And then this sort of secluded in the center, super blocks of subdivisions.
Well, I'm happy to see that Portland, where I live, is like a perfect propeller blade shape. You know,
in our town, you have northeast, northwest, southeast, and then street numbers like northeast 120th
street, right? And it just screams. We're on a perpendicular north, south, east, west grid.
And it definitely shows up here. And so this is some of the stuff that you came up with, OSM and X.
Yeah. So I used OSM and X to build all of these street network models from OpenStreetMap data.
And then OSM and X has built into it a visualization module that creates these kind of polar
histograms to understand how streets are oriented. Awesome. It's super interesting. Let's, and it's
like, it communicates to you just immediately as you look at it. It's great. Let's start by talking about
OpenStreetMap. This is the backing data, obviously, the important backing data of your library. So
what's the origin of OpenStreetMap? Yeah. So OpenStreetMap started maybe 20 years ago or so.
For folks who haven't seen it before, I often describe it as being akin to Google Maps meets Wikipedia.
So it's a worldwide mapping project with global coverage. Anyone can edit or contribute to it.
There is some editorial oversight as well to validate those edits. But what's cool about OpenStreetMap is
that its data license allows you to pull data from it. So unlike, say, Google Maps, which is fairly limited in what all it can draw,
you can really pull all of these features from OpenStreetMap. And if you look, if you, you know,
just zoom in on one of these cities here. Yeah. Let's go to Riverside.
Riverside. Yeah. Surface streets, rail lines, building footprints, parks, train stations, often grocery stores, restaurants, public schools, all this stuff we're interested in from an urban planning perspective.
Yeah. Oh, it's really interesting. And you can add in additional layers like cycling maps or transportation maps or topology maps, topological maps, all sorts of interesting things here.
Yeah, exactly. And it really lets you kind of hone in on the specific characteristics of the city that you're interested in.
And there's a humanitarian layer that you can see. And this has been one of the big uses of OpenStreetMap now for 15 years or so.
Often when there is a disaster in a less developed country, humanitarian aid organizations will go in and use OpenStreetMap and contribute to it
to create a kind of a digital layer of the facts on the ground.
So the Haiti earthquake a few years back was a primary example of that, where it helped them understand where urbanization was,
where there were water pumps, toilets and so forth, the kind of things that people need, but aren't well mapped, often in these informal settlements.
Yeah. Oh, it's it's amazing that we have, you know, I think everyone was amazed when Google Maps
came out, right before then we had MapQuest and all those things, you'd have big little up arrow, up arrow, right arrow to like pull in tiles of the world.
And, you know, Google Maps and the worldview that they had, what was that product called? Remember?
Where you could kind of fly, it was like a 3D thing, you could kind of fly around in the early days, but it was the same basic data thing.
Anyway, when that stuff came out, it was like, wow, this stuff is, you can now know about the world, you can say, where did that road go?
I never went down, you could just follow it and see or go to Street View or whatever. But a lot of that is locked behind.
However, Google wants you to use it. Right. And it's, it's not super accessible. And so having something
like this, where people can contribute, especially if they care about their neighborhood, right? A lot of
this people are contributing back into OpenStreetMap data.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah, so the nice thing with this is that it really is much more in that
open source, open data model of the world, which means we can do open science with it, citizen science
with it. People, you know, who just noticed that stuff is missing in their own community, you're able
to fix it. It's no longer that frustration of, well, when will Google get this thing right?
Right. We have this new highway that was built outside my town. When's it going to show up? I mean,
it's up to you. You can make it show up later today. There is a drawback to that though. The drawback is
you get what we call sampling biases. That is, you tend to see more coverage in places where people tend to
contribute more. And those things tend to be correlated with demographic characteristics. Men contribute more
than women. Higher income places more than lower income places, just from a resourcing perspective.
And so one of the challenges we face as researchers using OpenStreetMap data for our
analytics work is keeping those in mind because it's hard to do comparative analysis. If you don't know,
it's because the infrastructure is actually different in two places or because it's been digitized to a
different extent in two places. Right. Right. Right. Just maybe higher fidelity information might skew
some analysis one way or another, right? That's right. Exactly. And it tends to work pretty well
comparatively for stuff like roads, streets, whereas things like pedestrian footpaths or fresh food markets
might be well digitized in San Francisco and Portland, but probably not, say, in a small town in India or
Indonesia, let alone like a suburb of Des Moines, Iowa. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. One of the apps that I use a lot
is OnX. Do you know OnX? Yeah. OnX is cool. You can, I do a lot of off-road motorcycle riding and it'll show you
all the little trails and stuff, but you know, someone's got to go and enter all that information. And so
some places are super well mapped and others are not on the map at all. But yeah, I imagine they
probably get some of their data from OpenStreetMap as well, though I haven't been able to tell.
Yeah, it's a good question. A lot of people downstream do use OpenStreetMap data because of its quality and
accessibility. Yeah. Mark out in the audience is asking, is there some kind of mobile app that kind of gives you
access to the OpenStreetMap data? Kind of like Google Maps, but not. Yeah, there are some mobile apps for it.
I don't use them. It has some challenges with routing because it is publicly editable. Sometimes
there'll be little breaks in the connections where it's not digitized quite right. But there are
routing apps. So you could replace a Google Maps on your phone with OpenStreetMap and you can route with
it. Works particularly well in big cities and places like Europe and the US, less so in small rural areas
or in less developed countries. Yeah. Yeah. The OnX thing is, it doesn't really route you.
But it shows you on a map and it shows you where you go on it. And if you choose to stay on the path,
then it'll really help you. But it doesn't really say, you can't say, give me directions.
At least not when you're off-road. If you're on-road, maybe it'll fall back to something that works. But
yeah, amazing. So what's the licensing story behind all this data? Like how the name probably gives a lot
of it away, OpenStreetMap. But how is this data usable? What can people do with it?
Yeah. So it's basically usable for non-commercial purposes with attribution. So for example, as
as researchers, when we are using these data, we just need to attribute where it came from,
OpenStreetMap and its contributors. And I ended up including that license information somewhere on
the readme for OSM and X. Because I think a lot of times people will look over these underlying data
sources and tools when they're using these kind of downstream downstream tools and apps. So
because of that, I just wanted to call it. Yeah, you can see it on screen here. So I mentioned
OpenStreetMap's open data license requires that derivative works provide proper attribution,
which is really nice because it's a very easy thing to do for the cornucopia of data that they make
available. Yeah. Yeah. That's amazing. If I wanted to build a commercial product, I wanted to build on
X squared or whatever, where I could have people drive around and use that and map it and make notes,
maybe contribute back. Do you know what the story, I mean, obviously not a lawyer, right? But what's the,
would people be able to do that? Or is there a paid API or how does it work?
It's a, it's a good question. So I know in practice people can, because I see commercial
tools that use OpenStreetMap data all the time. I don't know the details though, because one of the
nice things about being in academia is you end up being so divorced from the commercial world that I
don't have to worry about that. Yeah. And that's, that's pretty good, right? Just do, do your research,
answer interesting questions and follow the lead, right? Those are the benefits. Yeah. It comes with
drawbacks, but those are the benefits. Yeah. I'm aware of some of the drawbacks as well, for sure.
All right. Well, so that is the foundation of this project, OSMNX. Tell us about your project.
Yeah. So, OSMNX is a Python package, that lets you interact with OpenStreetMap's APIs to make
it really easy to download data and build models or a data frame of those data. So the two main
things that it does is it can create a graph model. So that is a model of a network like streets or rails
or highways or anything else. or you can create a geo data frame. That's kind of a spatialized version
of a pandas data frame using geo pandas of OpenStreetMap features. So that's all the stuff in OpenStreetMap.
It could be points, lines, polygons. It could be, you know, traffic signals or parks or schools or roads.
But you can download either of those and then do whatever it is you want to do with them. And open,
OSMNX has some other stuff built in. So it has a simple routing engine built in, some visualization
tools. You can work with elevation so that you can figure out, street grades, particularly
relevant. For example, if you're a cyclist and you're trying to choose a shortest path that maybe
minimizes those grades and so forth.
Even for cars, you know, Google started offering a, this path saves, use the least fuel, or in my
case, the least electricity, whatever, whatever you put into it to make it go. that's also,
you know, that's uses like that would be interesting.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. I mean, that kind of superficially, we always imagine that our,
our shortest path to get somewhere is the one that minimizes our travel time.
But in reality, there are a lot of other things we try to minimize, including fuel consumption
or for pedestrians. empirically, we, we, we know that people will take longer routes. If it's
a nicer route, we're not trying to shake off a minute to walk, you know, along the arterial road with
you go, you go through the fence by that old abandoned factory back here and go straight across.
It'll be, it'll be great. You'll save a minute. Like, yeah, I'll go the long way.
Exactly. Amazing.
Okay. Yeah. Super fun. And as part of those visualizations, can you draw maps? Like, can you?
You can. Yeah. So it has, some mapping capabilities. you can also plot routes on it.
It ties in to a folium package, which is a Python package to develop leaflet JavaScript web maps.
Okay. So you can do interactive web maps from it. and then on top of OSMNX, there's a cool downstream
package called pretty maps that I'm not affiliated with, but does really nice, aesthetically pleasing
mapping. It's really customizable and really cool.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Do you have a gallery or something?
I do. Yeah. So if you scroll up a little bit, there's a link to the examples gallery. It's on
GitHub. OSMNX examples.
Oh, you can pull up different notebooks, huh?
Yeah, exactly. So each notebook kind of covers a different theme of analysis. It would be commonly
done with OSMNX. Oh, nice. Yeah. That's really cool. And people can just pull up the notebook and
see how it works. What one do you think is a good representative one to maybe like get a sense of how
to work with it? So, we count from zero because we're in the Python world. So notebook 00, is a
good place to start. Yeah. It kind of steps through some of the basic functionality that, most users
would be interested in starting with. Sure. Okay. Yeah. So people can download these notebooks
in the examples repository, which I'll link to. Yeah, that's really good. Yeah, exactly. So,
so there's a getting started guide and in the, the documentation after kind of reading through
that, that examples gallery is a really good way to just kind of get a sense of code that you can
copy and paste to get started. Okay. Excellent. And 5,000 GitHub stars, almost a thousand forks.
You know, that's quite a bit of traction and congratulations. Yeah. Thanks. I mean, it's, it's weird.
This is very much my, my side hustle, but it's also really been a labor of love for a long time.
I think if you explain it very carefully to academic power brokers, they say that makes sense. That's great. That's a good contribution.
uh, prima facie, that doesn't mean anything. Yeah. It's really, it's tough to put it on a 10 year application. Right?
Yeah. It makes it sound like you're, you're wasting your time and you don't understand what you're supposed to be doing with your time.
But you understand the research is so easy now. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's really how that started. I, I thought I was going to be able to do this research without having to create my own tool, but it turned out I was not able to.
Interesting. What was your background on programming at that point?
Um, yeah, so, my, undergrad and master's degree, I did computer systems and information systems.
Um, I worked on the private sector for a few years and decided to go back to school for my PhD in urban planning.
But when I was coming into that, I was pitching myself as the sort of like data science analytics kind of person in that world, which was starting to get kind of hot at that time. So it ended up being a nice fit.
And, when I started my, my dissertation, I had this dissertation proposal, that was, you know, very, very nice.
This kind of big grand proposal.
I ended up only doing the first chapter of it for my entire dissertation because of how these things expand to fill space.
And when I, when I pitched my proposal to my dissertation committee, there were a lot of assumptions about the tools that were out there.
You know, I knew OpenStreetMap was out there.
I'd seen there were some tools to download and work with data from it.
So I was pretty sure we'd be able to create a nice mathematical graph model of OpenStreetMap data automatically.
Um, as I started on my first week of making that happen, I realized that the tool did not exist.
And in fact, it was profoundly difficult to get data from OpenStreetMap.
And I, if you wanted to filter it, like, I just want pedestrian paths, not everything.
Right.
I just want, you know, drivable streets, not everything else.
And so the first year of my dissertation work was creating, the first version of OSM and X accordingly.
So you must have grants and stuff as for your research as academics do.
How much time are you allowed to sort of bring some of that into, you know, adding features back to this project?
Yeah.
You know, back to the benefits of academia.
The nice thing is as long as you get what they want to see done, as long as those outputs are there,
your time is really completely your own, right?
Yeah.
You teach a couple classes.
You have to publish a few papers a year.
Other than that, you're free to do whatever.
So I do get grants to help me fund my graduate students.
Um, ironically, it's very hard to get grants to do this kind of open source software, open commons development.
Everyone talks about it.
And especially grant funders know how much we all use this stuff and they really like it, but it just doesn't get funded.
So what you have to do is you have to kind of hack it in or sideload it, I guess, into your grants,
where the grant will answer this empirical question that's near and dear to the funders heart.
But to do that, we have this tool building phase for six months, be able to unlock the analytics for it.
And so that's really how a lot of the features and a lot of the modules have been added to OSMNX over time.
There's this new project I ought to do.
So we'll just build it into the package.
Right.
We need to, need to be able to answer new questions.
So we got to have new ways to get to the data.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
And it's, it is poorly incentivized in academia, but academia has really been home to a lot of open source tool development, especially niche tools, you know, from stuff like AstroPy, for the astronomers and astrophysicists to things like PySAL, the spatial analysis library in Python.
And a lot of things that academics have kind of been at the forefront of, but for us, it's always a side hustle.
Right.
Stuff with biology, psychology, a lot of the sciences, I imagine.
Yeah.
Working on open source projects like this feels to me very much like the concept of funding basic science, right?
Not funding.
We need to solve this problem so we can create a bomb or new energy or go to space.
But we're just doing it because we need to understand the science better and it'll help us then apply it eventually maybe at some point, right?
Same sort of thing here.
If these exist, it will supercharge the urban planning space to a huge degree.
But getting people to fund it or to care about helping build that up, I imagine it's a little bit frustrating.
No, that's exactly it.
The way I talk about it is it really is a sort of basic science work that everyone takes for granted as though these things just exist, right?
This tool just exists.
We don't know where it comes from.
It has an API.
That API just exists.
And it really kind of obscures all of these human decisions and social structures and processes and institutions that make it difficult or make other things easy and really shape what we end up being able to work with.
Yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
Well, someday maybe you can put down.
Yeah.
I only wrote two papers, but I have 10,000 get up stars.
So here's your tenure assignment.
This is the future.
I'm there for it.
It's a race between whether ChatGPT overtakes all of that stuff or you get there and people, I don't know, that's a whole different deal.
We can talk about that later.
Let's talk about the Overpass API, though.
That's the way that you get data from OpenStreetMap.
What is this?
Yeah.
So the Overpass API is another open source tool that lets us query OpenStreetMap's database and download stuff, basically any of OpenStreetMap's features.
So what's nice about Overpass is that there are some public instances that you can just query as a web API.
You can also host it locally if you want to work around throttling limits, rate limits.
Challenge with the Overpass API, you can see a little bit of it here on screen, is that the OverpassQL, its query language, can be really hard to work with to do complex stuff.
So this is a fairly simple one.
On screen, we can see there's a bounding box with some lat-long coordinates to explain where we want to download data from.
The output will be in JSON format.
The server timeout is 90 seconds.
Big queries can take a long time to run.
And then we're querying here for way elements.
So way would be a line feature in OpenStreetMap.
Any line, it could be street.
It could also be the building footprint's boundary line.
I see.
Property lines or zoning or whatever, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Anything represented as a line.
And so we get that back out.
It'll be kicked out as a JSON.
And what OSMX does is it works with this Overpass API to try to automate some of these queries.
So rather than having to write the query yourself, download the data, and then convert that raw OpenStreetMap data into a useful data format, like drop it into GeoPandas or into a NetworkX graph, it assembles all of that under the hood.
It's open source.
It's well-documented.
I have a few peer-reviewed articles about the exact process.
So we don't all have to reinvent the wheel trying to work with this data because none of this is automatic.
And in fact, you know, 10 plus years ago, people were very laboriously having to write these long scripts.
You know what I'm going to do?
I'm going to get a grad student, and it's going to be their job for the summer to convert this to Excel or MATLAB for me.
Something like that?
Exactly, yeah.
Grad students are great.
But what's greater, I think, is having one or two lines of code to replace your grad student.
100% and let them do meaningful work that they also like, right?
Yeah, that's the whole.
Yeah, yeah, it's fantastic.
As I look at this and think about this, it feels to me like OSM and X is a little bit like an ORM is to SQL and databases, right?
Yeah.
Let's you think more in Python language and concepts and don't worry about the query syntax and the data and all that kind of stuff.
Is that a reasonable analogy?
Yeah, that's a good way to put it.
And the goal for doing something like that is to try to democratize doing some of these analyses.
You know, OpenStreetMap data are really amazing.
Overpass is an amazing resource, but it's really hard to work with unless you have some software development
or database experience.
And a lot of urban planners or urban geographers or urban sociologists do not.
They have great questions.
They have great theory.
They want a hypothesis test, right?
But we limit science if our tools are too difficult to use or the right data are too hard to access.
Yeah.
Back to that basic science ideas, right?
So for something like this, what OSMX does is it puts that kind of overpass query into much more natural language.
Since Python is so readable in the first place, you can just say something like graph from place, give it a city name, say Pasadena, California.
My network type will be drive.
And then just like that, I have that drivable street network model within the city limits of Pasadena.
Right.
Yeah.
That sounds entirely more usable.
And one of the things you said is that it can be pretty expensive to query the overpass API.
And so your library caches that stuff locally, right?
That's right.
Yeah.
So expense in the computational sense, all these things are free to use.
Computationally expensive.
Yeah, exactly.
And there's a lot of time complexity to it as well.
So what we do is we cache everything, which helps you avoid rate limiting.
Let's OSMX be a good neighbor to these free public commons resources that are out there.
Yeah.
Interesting.
It sounds almost like you could have a Docker containers for different cities that are preloaded with all the data that might be interesting to just instantaneously answer a bunch of questions.
Yeah.
Which is really my workload.
So a lot of what I do will be I study every street network for every urbanized area in the world, right?
So we'll have like 8,000 to 9,000 of these large urban models.
And so I'll just have things cached locally so that the model building and analytics are really at the forefront rather than the downloading and querying for a day.
Right.
It not only lets you be a good citizen and not hammer on OpenStreetMaps API, but it just lets your stuff work faster.
So the incentives are aligned there, right?
Yeah.
And in fact, a lot of the time when people first use OSMX, you'll download, say, the model of Los Angeles, California.
And it takes a minute to run the query on their server, download whatever 100 megabytes of data, and then build that graph theoretic model, do all the spatial stuff to it.
But after that, it's nice and fast the next time that you do it because you're able to skip all that preprocessing.
Right.
It probably puts it into some super efficient data structure.
Oct trees or a tree or some others, you know, maybe dictionary, who knows, right?
Yeah.
And we use spatial indexes to accelerate all of the spatial queries locally too as well.
Is that built into Geopandas?
Yeah.
Built into Geopandas, there is an R tree, which is probably the most common spatial index.
But in addition to that, we also use SciPy's KD tree.
They have like a C implementation of a K dimensional tree that we use for the nearest neighbor search.
So that if you, so for example, you know, Google Maps, you say from my origin to my destination, we can do the same kind of thing.
Say from this point to that point, we'll snap the nearest neighbor on the network and then solve a path between them.
Okay.
So just the K nearest neighbor algorithm sort of applied to, what is that?
The vectors of the intersections or something?
And then you, the distance, the lines.
Yeah.
So normally when you do like origins and destinations, you would snap to a node in the network.
So the nodes would be like the intersections and dead ends.
And then the edges would be the links, the street segments that connect everything together.
And when you solve a path on a graph, it would be from a start node to an end node.
And you'd minimize it by something, either the fewest hops or the shortest distance or the shortest travel time.
If you incorporate, say, speed limits, everything else, you can bring in congestion information to minimize traffic congested travel time or minimize going up and down hills or anything else.
Excellent.
If I got this data downloaded and I wanted to put it into a proper database, and by proper, I mean one that like is its own process, different machines can talk to it in parallel and whatever, you know, like Postgres or Mongo or something.
Are there good databases that you would recommend or that you've tried like EdgeDB or Neo4j or graph databases the right way to go?
Or what do you think?
It depends on what you're trying to do in terms of OpenStreetMap features.
So if you're just downloading features and you're not worried about, say, those topological relationships between things, like in a street network, any tabular data structure will do.
You know, any kind of like SQL database will do just fine.
For a graph model, yeah, you'd want some kind of graph database because they can handle graph algorithms to do stuff like routing or other kinds of graph analytics like understanding connectivity on the network.
Yeah.
I have this, given this node, tell me all the things that are connected to it.
Like that, those kinds of questions could be answered.
Yeah.
Those kinds of questions.
They're kind of pre-computed by the indices and the structures.
What about bringing in other data?
You know, what if I have real estate data that doesn't come from OpenStreetMap, but I want to pull that in and overlay it with, say, zoning information, overlapped with census data that gives me revenue, you know, how much that person in that area makes per year on average or something like that.
Can you answer questions like that?
Yeah.
A really common use case.
So OSMNX can kind of do that by itself, but mostly as a tool in the toolkit to do it.
So, you know, a common way that we often will do this is for accessibility analyses.
So, for example, here at my house, how many grocery stores could I access within a 15 minute walk?
And it gives you a sense of, you know, how car dependent or not a place is.
And also we can start looking at food deserts in certain communities where people don't have access to fresh food.
So for that, what you're doing is you have a model of the network and then you also have all of this point of interest data, right?
So where all these amenities are located, you would then snap them, load them onto the graph, and then you can calculate accessibility by looking at where those things are located.
And you can either look at cumulative opportunities within some time horizon or distance to the nearest opportunity.
You can put different decays on it, like the utility of it being so far away drops off with a linear decay the further I have to go or a nonlinear decay that really drops off fast.
Right.
But it's exactly that.
Yeah.
If a grocery store is three miles away, it's not one third as useful as one that's one mile away.
It's quite a bit more to carry your groceries that far.
And similarly, there's marginal utility for the 30th grocery store that you can reach.
It doesn't give you that much benefit over the 29th that you can reach.
Whereas the first and second are very valuable.
Yeah.
If it goes from zero to one and one to two, those are big, big jumps right there.
Yep.
Yeah.
Okay.
Very interesting.
How about some projects that people might be thinking about?
You know, they look at this data and they're like, wow, this looks really detailed and neat.
And we have all these different aspects we can ask about, but, you know, maybe they just want to play around.
Yeah.
I mean, hopefully, you know, if you look at the getting started guide, these usage examples, you'll see it's really easy to play around, you know, two, three lines of code.
And you have a visualization of your local street network.
A few things that we've done in my lab at USC that may spark some interest.
We look at air pollution exposure and driving patterns in Los Angeles to try to understand, you know, who's driving and where.
And then in turn, who is exposed to that tailpipe, those tailpipe emissions from those cars.
So we use OSM and X to model those street networks, to simulate those trips and to look at what census tracts that stuff goes through.
We also use it for studies of urban form.
So that is kind of the shape, texture, density, the grain of a city.
I have this series of square mile visualizations of different cities around the world.
And you can really quickly see how different forms of urbanism look relative to each other.
So a place like Irvine, California, here in Southern California, has this really coarse grained street network.
A place like Venice in Italy has incredibly fine grained like spider web street network.
Stuff like that really helps to kind of convey these different modes of urbanism and urbanization.
We also use these to look at disaster resilience.
That is, different street networks will be better if things start going wrong around them.
Things with more redundancy, more connectivity built in are easier to route around if parts start failing in a fire, in an earthquake.
So we can calculate some of these characteristics and then make recommendations to planners and policymakers about how to make your street network,
how to intervene in it to make it more resilient.
Yeah.
In my area, there's an east-west highway, one of the very few that goes from the city west.
It has to go through this mountain tunnel.
And it's two lanes each way in the mountain or three lanes in the mountain tunnel.
And there's even on a Saturday afternoon, there's stopped cars trying to go through that tunnel.
And those are on good days.
Imagine if there was an emergency.
It would just be done.
Yeah, that's the 26, right?
Exactly.
It is the 26.
Yeah.
I used to live in Portland.
I lived in Goose Hollow.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
And my gym was in Beaverton.
So I would have to go through that tunnel to go work out.
It would always be like, you know, one of these days.
One of these days.
Exactly.
Yeah.
I live about a mile from Goose Hollow up through that tunnel.
So, yeah.
Oh, cool.
Yeah, yeah.
Very cool.
Yeah.
But there's just  and that one's hard to fix because there's houses all along there.
It's a big hill.
It's hard to go over it.
You know, it would take a lot of willpower to make another tunnel.
Yeah, interesting thing.
I did my PhD at Berkeley, and there is another tunnel there that goes from that kind of inner East Bay, Berkeley, Oakland border, out to the further east suburbs like Orinda, Moraga, and so forth.
And that tunnel is really old.
I mean, it's, I don't know, 80 years old, maybe, something like that.
And they determined that when the big one does eventually hit, it will fail, it will collapse.
And it's not  it's cost prohibitive to actually prevent that from happening.
So, the idea is it will collapse and crush everyone in that tunnel, and they will then build a new tunnel at that point when they have to.
Oh, my goodness.
We have, like, that's what it's all about.
Yeah, just go quickly when you're in the tunnel.
Get out of there.
I always did.
Amazing.
All right.
Let's talk real quickly about integrating Open OSMNX with other data science tooling, right?
We have so many different things.
We have PyTorch.
We have Pandas.
We have Polars.
All the different things.
Like, what are the different integration features?
You know, you talked about data frames.
That sounds like Pandas and Pandas and Geopandas, right?
So, that's one sort of path across those things.
Yeah.
So, OSMNX is built primarily on top of three things.
It's NetworkX for the graph models, Geopandas for the spatial data frames, and Matplotlib for the visualizations.
In the spatial Python world, most stuff happens in the Pandas ecosystem because Geopandas and PySAL and similar tools are very Pandas oriented.
I know there's been some work toward Geopolar, but it's kind of in its infancy, as far as I know, to this extent.
But that'll be great when that's available.
NetworkX is another funny one because it's a pure Python implementation.
It has a lot of loops.
So, it can go really slow for calculating some of these big time complexity graph algorithms.
Things like betweenness centrality, where you have this massive OD matrix of basically all the nodes to all the nodes.
Yeah, yeah.
Some combinatorial craziness.
It ends up being very time consuming to calculate those kinds of things for a metro area sized network model.
So, we'll integrate with other tools.
iGraph does that in C.
Also, using tools like QGraph, where you can do it on the GPU instead.
Oh, wow.
Okay.
Yeah.
But it's limited because the waiting scheme doesn't let you say, I want to minimize travel time, stuff like that.
I see.
Yeah.
And then also integrated with Folium to create interactive leaflet web maps out of the box.
I wonder how that the free-threaded Python stuff will affect some of those computational things.
Like that everything compared with everything else sounds like a so-called embarrassingly parallel sort of problem.
Yeah.
Right?
And so, if you could just say, well, you have 10 cores, so let's just do 10 blocks of them all in parallel.
And, you know.
Yeah.
So, that's what we do when we do it in pure Python.
So, we'll use multiprocessing generally with all your CPUs.
The only challenge is that your OD matrix, your origin destination matrix is growing at this exponential rate.
But then there's a linear number of cores, so going from 1 to 24 and dividing by a factor of 24.
But when you have, say, a million nodes times a million nodes in your graph, it's going to take you a long time.
It's still going to be slow.
But it's...
You've gone from months down to weeks.
Yeah.
I mean, you're still dividing it by the number of cores, but it doesn't necessarily mean it's super fast.
Although, the GPU stuff seems like it could absolutely fly, right?
Yeah.
That makes a big difference.
And I think that's really the area of growth where handling...
I mean, basically getting out of Python loops in the first place is the biggest area of growth.
And then doing things on a...
Since these are really just very simple linear algebra problems, being able to do them on a GPU makes it much more efficient.
Yeah.
Did you hear about this thing, this new NVIDIA?
I don't know what it's called.
Project Digits?
Where they announced a $3,000 desktop AI computer.
I mean, they call it AI, but really it's just a GPU beast.
It is interesting.
No, I hadn't heard about that.
And this thing, it's the size of a Mac Mini.
If you look at the picture, it's a little bit of a golden thing.
It's kind of clever that made it gold.
But that's a massive computer sitting next to you.
Yeah.
You could run that.
This is pretty interesting, actually, I think.
Yeah.
Yeah, that is.
That is.
I mean, it's shocking, too, because it looks so much smaller than just an NVIDIA card in your desktop.
I think it basically is just the GPU and nothing to do with graphics.
And then you just remote into it over, I don't know, a terminal or however you, or maybe you set it as the Docker host.
And then you just do Docker locally, but it runs there, you know, that type of thing.
I don't know how it works, but I kind of want one.
Yeah.
I mean, it looks sexy enough.
Of course you would want one, right?
Of course.
But if you had questions like that, if you say, I have a million nodes and I could run that on a GPU, getting something like this that's, you know, kind of the H100 style of like the really large, just meant for compute, not really a graphics card.
Yeah.
It seems like that would really unlock some interesting options.
Yeah, totally.
I mean, yeah.
So I have a GeForce card in my desktop that I'll pass some of that stuff locally onto.
But another one of the academic benefits at USC, we have a high performance computing buster that I can schedule tasks to run on that, say, over winter break and then come back in January.
January and the month of 1000 CPUs is all done.
That's amazing.
We had a mainframe, Silicon Graphics mainframe when I was studying math that we could all work on in this group, maybe 10 of us.
And it wasn't as big as what you're saying, but it was, you know, a quite expensive big machine.
It had its own room and it was really loud to go into that room.
And I remember we came in to, I came in to do whatever I was working on as a grad student or whatever.
I think I was a senior.
Anyway, I came in to work on my project and nobody could access it.
And it was still in there making loud noises like it was running, but it acted like it wasn't running.
And so what is going on?
One of the other grad students had run a job like you're talking about, but they were having trouble getting into work because they were math people, not programmers.
And they started logging everything.
And there were no limits on what people could do to the computer.
The people had set it up.
And so what had happened is it ran 100% CPU on all the cores all night logging until it ran out of space.
And then apparently the computer won't run anymore if it has zero more bytes.
It needed some temp file or something.
And so it just, it was just done.
I imagine you guys have more guardrails than that.
Yeah, a lot of guardrails.
I would love to try to do something like that just for the yuck sometime.
The admins of that computer would not please with that grad student.
I can only imagine.
It took a long time to get it going.
It's like a day of work to get it turned back on because they didn't even know what was wrong with it at first.
It just wouldn't turn on.
Oh, well.
Jumping back a moment to the, no, that's not the one I wanted to copy, to the integration.
Have you considered working with narwhals?
I looked into narwhals recently.
My understanding is one of the things that does well is it kind of abstracts away from pandas versus polars.
Yeah.
So you're less tool dependent, right?
And it also lets people who want to consume your library, who want to do their work in polars, talk polars to your project.
And people want to do pandas, talk pandas, as well as QDF, moden, pyro, and other.
It kind of is an adapting layer.
So people can work in their native framework and then talk to you.
Yeah.
I mean, yeah, on paper it sounds great.
I haven't played with it yet other than just being familiar with it.
But I mean, that sounds like the ideal, right?
We shouldn't be enforcing these certain APIs or languages on people.
Yeah.
It does look interesting.
I believe it's foundational internals or maybe just the API.
But they're polars, not pandas.
So maybe that's not as good of a fit.
But it could be an interesting thing to look in the future to sort of make it native to all the different data frame libraries that people want to talk in.
Yeah.
Yeah, definitely.
Are you going to need a new grant?
Yeah.
Here's the basic science stuff, right?
I mean, if I can't get them interested in network models, I don't know about getting into the nuts and bolts of which data frame API we should have people use.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
All right.
Well, let's close this whole conversation out by talking about something that I know is on a lot of people's minds.
And that's LLMs.
And, you know, what is what do LLMs mean for this mapping data and the types of questions you can answer and OSM and X, all these types of things?
Like, how's that shaping your world?
Yeah.
So two ways that I like to think about it.
One is what LLMs have to offer us today.
And then one is what LLMs have to offer us, say, five to 10 years from now.
That is, how do we future-proof ourselves, our careers, our livelihoods?
And I mean, or just optimistically, how do we really get ahead of it to take advantage of nice things that they'll have to offer?
Today, I am deeply unimpressed with most of the use cases that I see for it.
I think that the outputs only look good to people who aren't experts and don't know how wrong it is.
It does some things well, you know, like having a co-pilot while you're coding and having it recommending.
That's nice.
I mean, it's like tab complete from years ago.
It's the same kind of thing, just iterating it.
But, you know, when someone tells it to, you know, here's the prompt, generate my algorithm for me.
Two things.
One, it very often doesn't do that good of a job even at this point.
And number two, if you don't enjoy doing that kind of thing, I'm not sure why you're in software development in the first place.
I know.
For me, when I interface with it, it's usually in the classroom.
And you'll have, so, you know, people like to complain, kids these days.
It's the same way it was when I was in school.
You know, a third of the class loves a subject.
They're just killing it.
They want to be there.
They want a job in this.
A third of the class, they're like, well, it's a required class.
I'll try to do what I can.
And a third of them say, I don't know why I'm here.
Why is this a required course?
I hate this.
Is there any way I can cheat to just get a passing grade?
Where's my shortcut?
Exactly.
I mean, and, you know, the difference today is that LLMs make it so much easier and they really normalized cheating.
And I think one of the problems here, you know, it goes back to like licensing or attribution.
And when we normalize this kind of cheating, we're normalizing taking credit for things that aren't our work.
And if we're doing that in school, we build those habits.
What's it going to look like when we're working in the workforce?
We either don't have the skills that people think we have or we think it's just normal, acceptable practice to copy and paste and say, here's my intellectual contribution.
It's too much of a crutch.
And if, you know, maybe it solves 90% of the problems, but that 10% it doesn't, you're fully incapable of approaching that problem, right?
Exactly.
Yeah.
And I think, you know, so that's the first part, what LLMs offer us today.
I think the second part is, say, five to 10 years from now.
And part of it is scary and part of it is exciting.
I think that coding, as it looks today, is going to largely go away over my lifetime.
Because coding is this mix of art and intellectual labor and manual labor.
The manual labor parts, you know, will be going away.
And that's where a lot of people use LLMs now to reduce some of that grind of coding.
And I think it's important for us to figure out where those intellectual contributions are, where the art, the poetry of coding remains a human contribution moving forward.
Where we have, you know, that sort of human in the loop to make ethical decisions that we don't pass off.
Where it is humans who are doing some of the architecting and not just handing it off saying, here's a prompt.
Now, redesign our financial system from the ground up for us.
But that it remains human guardrails and human ethics and human notions of justice that we use AI to help us, but doesn't replace that.
Yeah.
I feel like there's going to be a lot of people who are programmers now are going to have to kind of be a senior tech team lead type of thing where the team is asking the LLM to do stuff for you.
And that's going to be awesome for those people, us.
But for the people who are brand new, there's going to be a wider gap to try to cross.
It's going to be harder and harder to go from real beginner to that level when who's going to employ you when it takes you a day.
And I can ask the LLM to do it in five minutes and I got to review it either way.
That's a very concerning social consequence, I think.
Exactly.
And I think those kind of entry level jobs are very much more labor focused, right?
The senior dev isn't doing that work because someone with less experience, less pay can do it.
And if LLMs replace that over time, it's really hard to get your foot in the door in that industry.
It's going to be like COBOL programmers did not a program without an LLM someday.
Yeah.
I don't know if that's good or bad, but it's going to be weird.
Anyway, I think it's probably pretty interesting.
And given access with your API and with all this data, I'm sure people will be able to ask and answer interesting questions with it.
That's the hope.
Indeed.
All right.
Two really quick things to close out our conversation.
Roadmap.
Anything on the roadmap coming real soon that people have been asking about, thinking about?
Yeah.
So I just released V2.0.
I love my show ago.
Thank you.
And that was really just a year of rethinking the API.
I was going to allow myself breaking changes, really cleaning things up.
I added type annotations for the first time.
I really changed the linting and formatting, CI, pre-commit, everything.
So it's a much more rigorous package at this point.
I'm taking a breather right now where I don't have that much big on the horizon.
I try to keep a really clean issue board as well where I quickly triage.
This is in scope.
This is not.
Yeah.
I noticed you have three open issues and zero PRs, which is awesome.
I try to do it courteously where I'll tell people a lot of the time, you know, this isn't in scope for the project, but I appreciate the suggestion.
But I'm busy.
So keeping a clean issue board makes my life simple.
So short answer, I'm taking a breather instead of roadmapping.
But you just had a big release, which is cool.
Yeah.
Contributions accepted?
Absolutely.
And very often what I ask when someone opens an issue and I say, yeah, that does sound useful.
Would you like to open a PR?
I, you know, in as much as this is my side hustle, most of the pull requests that I add to it are very much aligned with a current or recent research project that I'm working on.
Right.
So for others, you know, if you see a gap or a cool feature that could make people's lives easier, better analytics down the road, please propose it.
And I'd love a contribution.
Excellent.
All right.
Final call to action.
People are psyched about mapping.
They want to get started.
What do you tell them?
I tell them to work through existing examples from the tools that are out there.
If you haven't done any kind of mapping before, there's a lot of cool packages in R and in Python.
Find something you're comfortable with.
Work through some tutorials.
And then figure out something close to home.
It's so much easier if you have that kind of local motivation, local knowledge.
Do some mapping.
Do an analysis in your community for something that's bothering you that you think could be better.
Excellent.
All right.
Well, thank you for being here.
And congrats on the cool project.
Thank you very much.
Yep.
Bye.
Okay.